docs: document compliant vs non-compliant applications (#1953)
keymanapp/help.keyman.com: knowledge-base/kb0118.md

However, many keyboards implement complex rules that depend on a sequence of multiple characters. With these rules, output of a key depends on the key typed and also the context, which is the text that immediately preceeds the insertion point.

For example, suppose that the user just typed the apostrophe in the following text:

>I always order the club sandwich at our corner caf'

If the active Keyman keyboard is `EuroLatin(SIL)`, and the user now types the letter **'e'**,' Keyman will not simply output the character 'e'. Instead, it will see that the previous character typed was an apostrophe, and it will combine this with the 'e' and output an '&#x00e9;'. Keyman will insert this character in place of the existing apostrophe so that it producing this text:

>I always order the club sandwich at our corner café

Without knowing the context, Keyman is unable to execute rules like this.

## Non-compliant behavior

The most common limitation with applications that are non-compliant is that Keyman is unable to read the context.

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Author: I'm not clear on what change you are suggesting here.

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Reviewer: I think the second part of the sentence that is confusing. ln:62 says "read the context"
Then this says "where to read text to load the context" I think this may be documenting the an implentation where your read the "con(text) and load it into an internally in the keyman engine context.

Maybe something like 
```If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read the context from.```

Having said all that is talking about the location really that need. At the end of the day API call(s) either allows Keyman to be able to read the current context or it doesn't.

Although I read below that this is for developers so I guess going into the location issue will help point Mac developers to the nuances that exist in half implemented API calls.

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Reviewer: Looking at your sequence diagram, I see you have two distinct calls, so that helps explain these sentences around location. 

Prehaps, you could put a footnote that Linux uses ibus_engine_get_surrounding_text and Windows the Text Services Framework.

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Author: > Looking at your sequence diagram, I see you have two distinct calls, so that helps explain these sentences around location.
> 
> Prehaps, you could put a footnote that Linux uses ibus_engine_get_surrounding_text and Windows the Text Services Framework.

Marc was suggesting that we follow the general explanation of compliance with specific sections that each of us document for our respective platforms. I was trying to write this in a way that was not mac-specific, but it sounds like what I have is not generic enough.

Can both @rc-swag and @ermshiperete respond with more details about your APIs, so I can determine a better way to describe this so it generically represents all three? It sounds like maybe you don't use the location at all, and everything acts on the current location, but I'm wondering whether you just provide a relative location when you want to replace existing text?

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a really good de-siloing discussion on the differences in compliance between platforms. Worth persisting on!

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Reviewer: ## Getting the Application Context
 

There is quite a bit to the Text Services Framework (TSF) and I am not on top of it all. I will give the summerised call stack, which is way more than you need for this knowledge base. Hopefully it will help you to pull out just the bits you need for your combined general description.

Keyman implements as TextInputText Service; there are a number of events it then needs to support of on the is `OnKeyDown()` which when called passes in a pointer to an `ITfContext` instance. From Microsoft “The ITfContext interface is implemented by the TSF manager and used by applications and text services to access an edit context.” [Learn Microsoft](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/msctf/nn-msctf-itfcontext). 
The key methods are 
`GetStatus():` Retrieves the status of the context.
`GetSelection():` Retrieves the current selection.
`SetSelection():` Sets the current selection.
`GetText():` Retrieves text from a specific range.
`SetText():` Replaces text in a specific range.

Just some notes on how much context can be retrieved it is up to the app how much it will return but you can restrict the amount in the API call and the Keyman Engine in Windows does that to defined constant of 64.

### Summerised Call Stack
```
OnKeyDown 
_KeymanProcessKeystroke()
...
TIPProcessKeyEx()
..
ReadContext() 
TIPGetContextIsSelected()
```   
(Gets the context plus sets a flag if text is selected = highlighted.
```
KeymanGetContext()
```
This is finally where it can now use `ITfContex`t  object (pContext is the name in the code)
It can `GetStatus` and check for a flag `TF_SS_TRANSITORY` to see if it will be “compliant” if not use legacy, meaning Keyman's own internal context.

```
GetLeftOfSelection()
```
 Keyman wrapper it does checks for “highlighted” text I have left that out for now.
**Finally, the API calls of interest**

```
GetSelection() 
```
 - this gets the full text the application is able to give
```
GetText(MaxContext)
``` 
This will get up to 64 characters next to the current caret or cursor position.  So now we have the **context**. 

## InsertText  or Output

```
KeymanProcessOutput()

```
DeleteLeftOfSelection is one way of remove any characters before inserting the new text.
```
DeleteLeftOfSelection() ( Keyman Function )
    using the  `ITfContext`  interface.
    GetSelection()

    .. some other calls 
    SetText 

```

```
InsertTextAtSelection ( Keyman Function ) 
```	
using the  ITfContext  interface

```
pContext->QueryInterface(IID_ITfInsertAtSelection, (void **)&pInsertAtSelection)

```
This call get ITfInsertAtSelection interface. [ITfInsertAtSelection | Microsoft Learn](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/msctf/nn-msctf-itfinsertatselection)

**Key API Call**
```
ipInsertAtSelection->InsertTextAtSelection(ec, 0, pchText, cchText, &pRange) 
```
Inserts the text at the current caret 
**Key API Call**
```
pContext->SetSelection(ec, 1, &tfSelection);
```
Updates the caret in other words the user focus area.

> If the API to get the current location is not supported, then Keyman is not aware of where to read text to load the context.

Author: I've updated the doc as suggested by Marc and added a section specific to the Mac, so we can do the same for Windows with your info.

> If the API to get text is not supported, then Keyman may know the location but is still unable to read the text at that location.

Author: I'm not clear on what change you are suggesting here.

The only problem with this approach is that it assumes that the user is typing continuously in the same application without taking any of these common actions:

- using the mouse to move the insertion point
- using a command key to move the insertion point
- using arrow keys to change the location
- pressing the home, end, page up or page down keys
- using a menu shortcut or hotkey to insert or remove text or move to a different location or document
- switching to another application

Keyman watches for all these context-changing events to detect whether its buffered context is still valid. If it detects one of these events, then it discards its buffer and assumes an empty context. This has the effect of Keyman appearing to forget where it was because it has no knowledge of its location in the document. If this happens in the middle of typing a sequence of keys, then the sequence will not be recognized and transformed properly and will need to be retyped.

> 

Reviewer 3: I don't know how it's on Mac, but on Linux with non-compliant apps there's also no API for deleting characters so we have to generate a backspace keypress.

I wonder if we should mention that? Probably not necessary for normal users, but definitely for developers that we try to convince to make their apps compliant (if they are part of the intended audience).

Author: That is same on the Mac -- we also need to generate backspace keys. I will add a description of that in the section about working around non-compliant behavior.

The audience is more for developers and integrators, but it wouldn't hurt for them to know what Keyman is doing. And it would be good to have something to point to if we are reporting something to an application developer, just to show them the impact.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, looks like we have another category of people that's not mentioned in the glossary: people working on products like LibreOffice, Chrome, Adobe... I don't think they qualify as integrators since they are not interested in Keyman and might not use anything from Keyman at all but we might still want to explain to them how certain aspects of Keyman work.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I see what you mean. I called them `integrators` because their interaction with us would be  fairly similar, just more limited -- and we 'integrate' with them, even if not the other way around. (I am also not that comfortable with 'developer' for the Keyman team because it's such an overloaded term and ends up being used in all sorts of places.)

Until we come up with better category names (realizing that all the categories will likely have boundary problems), let's stick with the 'user', 'author', 'integrator', 'developer' categories, and keep external app developers into the 'integrator' basket.

Keyman works around the inability to read the context by keeping a small buffer of its recent output. Keyman can use the new key event combined with this buffer to determine the correct output.

The only problem with this approach is that it assumes that the user is typing continuously in the same application without taking any of these common actions:

- using the mouse to move the insertion point
- using a command key to move the insertion point
- using arrow keys to change the location
- pressing the home, end, page up or page down keys
- using a menu shortcut or hotkey to insert or remove text or move to a different location or document
- switching to another application

Keyman watches for all these context-changing events to detect whether its buffered context is still valid. If it detects one of these events, then it discards its buffer and assumes an empty context. This has the effect of Keyman appearing to forget where it was because it has no knowledge of its location in the document. If this happens in the middle of typing a sequence of keys, then the sequence will not be recognized and transformed properly and will need to be retyped.

### Inability to replace text

> When the application does not correctly share the current location, then it is not possible to replace text because replacing text requires specifiying the location and length of characters to replace. Keyman works around this limitation by generating backspace keys and sending them to the application. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the application does not correctly share the current location, then it is not possible to replace text because replacing text requires specifiying the location and length of characters to replace. Keyman works around this limitation by generating backspace key events and sending them to the application. 
```

In the earlier example with the apostrophe-e combination producing '&#x00e9;', only one character, the existing apostrophe, would need to be replaced. So Keyman would only need to send a single backspace. 

> In other situations, the Keyman keyboard may both transform text and change the order of text that has already been typed. When that is the case, multiple backspaces would be generated as a workaround for non-compliant applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other situations, the Keyman keyboard may both transform text and change the order of text that has already been typed. When that is the case, multiple backspace key events would be generated as a workaround for non-compliant applications.
```
